From Hanselman is.com. It's Hansel
minutes. Oh, look the discussion
with web developer and technologists,
Scott Hanselman hosted by call
Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcement
show number 11, quoted Sunday,
March 19th, 2006 sport for Hanselman it's
just provided by automated QA
makers of TestComplete providing automated
testing of windows.net framework, Java
and web application online@wwwdotautomatedqa.com. And
by Peter bloom.com start with
better controls. Finish with better
sites online@wwwdotpeterblum.com. Support is also
provided by dotnet developers journal.
The world's leading dotnet developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott explores the Microsoft
command shell code name. Monad.
Hi, this is Carl Franklin and
you're listening to Hansel minutes.
Show number 11 as always.
I'm here with Scott Hanselman
and this week, Scott, we're
talking about the monad shell,
right? The Microsoft command shell
code named monad. I like
to call it mush, but
apparently no one else does.
So, but it's MSH. It's
the Microsoft command show. I
find it kind of strange
that we're talking about a
cryptic and terse UI on
a podcast. Sorta. Definitely think
the podcast medium is not
lending itself to describing command
lines, but we're going to
take it to the next
level though. We're gonna, yeah,
we're going to do a
show on this on DNR
TV. Definitely. So what is
the Microsoft command shell? So,
so the Microsoft command shell
again, Kona, codenamed monad is
a command line interface. It's
the new command line interface.
You know, if you go
out to windows now and
type the Vista, well, no,
not for Vista for windows,
XP windows 2003 Vista and
Longhorn shirt. I see. So
I'm running MSH right now
on my machine. It's like
a very small download. All
you need is.net framework to
Oh, okay. It doesn't take
over anything on your system.
It doesn't mess up your
dos prompt. They just released
on February 27th, beta 3.1 of
of monad. You can, if
you, if you're running gun
and framework, you can run
this right now. That's good
to know because I was
under the impression that it
was a Vista only thing
know that the show will
run on XP 2003 Vista,
which is the client Longhorn
and then the coming Longhorn
server, but a windows XP
and windows 2003 is all,
all the, you need to
know right now, if you're
running Dutton at two O
you can just install mush
on top of it or
MSH on top of it.
Excellent. So, so let's get
started with the, with the
links and in the discussion.
So I, I had seen
this myself at PDC. I
think we all had, we
kind of went to the
talks. We saw this cryptic
and confusing thing. It says,
Oh, it's the new dos
prompt, which is really in
a way, way over simplification.
And, and I kind of
said, okay, yeah, this is
silly. You know, I was
talking to storage Solaria at
my, at my company currently.
And a couple of actually
almost a year ago when
I first saw this and
he was like, Oh, this
is it. This is where
it's going. And I was
like, no, I'm just totally
not impressed. Yeah. And then
I posted something on my
blog about getting actually enclosures
for you, Carl. We want
it to go up and
make a little script that
would, that would pick up
an enclosure from an RSS
feed. And I banged it
out in C sharp, and
you converted it to a
vb.net. And it was maybe
what 12 lines of code
and not too long, not
too big, not too long,
12 lines of code. And
then out of nowhere, Keith Hill
who's got, who was actually
the MVP for the command
shell. So command shells have
MVPs. Now this guy, is
that very cool, good at
what he does. It's pretty
awesome. Keith Hill at a shrinker.com/d
five eight says, well, you
know, you could have just
done that at the command
line, rather than writing a
throwaway program. You could have
just bang this out. And
he did it in three
lines. Wow. And he probably
could have done it in
two pretty cool stuff. So
from the command line, he
just fires up MSH and
he types in dollar sign
Earl. That's how you declare
a variable within the command
line. So you're out there
at the command line. You're
just creating a variable. It's
almost like an interactive dotnet
shell, just like Ruby. People
are familiar with the IRB,
the interactive Ruby shell. You
can just sit down, fire
it up. You just type
dollar sign, Earl equals quote.
And they typed in, I
typed in the Earl to
my blog enter. So now
that dollar sign Earl variable
exists out there. And then
monad MSH is going to
know that that's a string.
It just gleans it. Right.
It uses, it looks like
a duck it's duck typing.
So it figures out that
Earl has a string and
that's in the environment now
it's available to us to
be used. So then he
says, dollar sign feed. So
he's going to actually get
the feed from my RSS.
And he says, new hyphen
object. So that's a called
a commandlet and they're always
verb noun, like, get hyphen
this, or add hyphen that
in this case, he's saying
new hyphen or that you
know that these two things
are associated. Right. And they're
very picky about that within
the shell. If you're going
to create these new commandlets
and commandlets is spelled CMD,
L E T S commandlet
CMD lit. Okay. You could
create them with this verb
noun construct. So he says
new object system.net dot web
client, which we've created before.
Right. You just make a
new web client, right. And
then says, download string.download string.
Now he doesn't have any
IntelliSense inside of a NSH
right now. It's just a
command line. So you do
have to know what you're
doing a little bit more
than visual studio. This is
not visual studio. It's an
interactive shell. And then he
says, dot download string passes
in Earl. That RSSV, that
he mentioned before. And this
is the cool part. Then
he says in brackets and
square brackets at the beginning
of the string bracket XML.
So he's basically doing like
a cast, like a cast,
the XML. Yeah. Yeah. But
not quite a cast. It's
something more than that. It's
almost like he's saying treat
this like XML. He could
have just left it and
it would have been a
string. Okay. So now he's
done two lines. He's set
in a row. He set
a feed and he's automatically
downloaded my entire RSS feed.
And then he just goes,
and he says, feed dot
gala, get elements by tag
name. We've done that before,
right? Yeah. Cause feed at
this point is an XML
document by casting it to
XML, he's getting all of
the XML document methods available
to him. He says, get,
get elements by tag name
enclosure. And this is the
powerful part. Then he does
a pipe. You've done pipes
before. Right. Dos. You could
say like, if you wanted
to find out all of
the things in the GAC
that have your name in
them, right. I'm sure you
put things in the gag.
When you write a.net application,
you might say GAC utill
slash L for list. And
then you'd pipe it through
find and say, find all
the things that have the
word. Carl use the output
of that as the input
to find exactly. Cause the,
and what is the output
of GAC Utila in that
context, it's just a string,
right? It's a, it's just
a big it's whatever was
going out to the screen
and then find us kind
of a filter on that.
Wow. Well, in monad you're
not passing strings around you're
passing objects around, and this
is where the complete explosion
of the brain happens. Get
elements by tag name returns
on node list, right? It
doesn't return strings. And then
he pipes it through a
thing called format list. This
is a thing that knows
how to take objects and
format them. So he says,
get out of mounts by
tag name, pipe format list.
He could say format table.
I've seen those format, HTML
format, XML, he's passing objects
out of the backside of
get elements by tag name.
And he could pipe the
HTML to a, to an
HTML file and he'd have
the results. Exactly. And you
could redirect it to a
file and you've written stuff
out. And the interesting thing
here is that format list
in this context is just
receiving the pipe content format
list. Doesn't care that it's
XML doesn't know anything. It
can handle any kind of
object. Right. So I could
have said DIR pipe format
list, and I would be
able to see the directory
as a format formatted list.
We'll talk about that in
a second. So three lines
of code and he could
have done it in two.
If he wanted to be
really terse and he probably
could have strung it all
together into one big, giant
single line of code. Wow.
This is really powerful. It
takes a second. And then
once your brain explodes, it's
like, Oh my God, I
could do so much with
this. Let's just pause for
the mental imprint. And then
wait a second. We're not
supposed to waste people's time
on this podcast to very
bright. So you'll Have to
pause it yourself and then
come back. Well, the annual
fund Pause that way. It's
your time. Not ours. Pretty
amazing. I mean, what I'm
thinking of now is of
course, you know, scripts, you
know, writing scripts to do
things that you would normally
do to write little programs
for, of course, you know,
that it begs the question.
How much do you do
with this versus, you know,
at what point do you
say, I'm just going to
write it out. So that's
a very good question. What
is an app and what
is a script and what
I, what I'm thinking is
let's ask the hard question
that many people are asking
already, why isn't VB script
enough. Right. Right. Sure. Why
can't I just type a
dot VBS file and beyond
with it, right? Yeah. So
with, with VB script, you're,
you're looking at a comm
style language. You've got all
of the, the frustrations of
comm calling.net applications. And dotnet
componentry is pretty tricky. I
would think from within C
script or w script dot
exe, you don't have a
lot of rich error handling
all the great things that
there are about.net, very limited
memory management. You still have
to set things equal to
nothing you're poking around in
calm a lot. You don't
have any security model around
dot VBS is right. It's
pretty much I can run
them or I can't. I
know I can't email them.
And, but I can pretty
much double click on them
anytime I want to. So
you're saying that there's a
security model we haven't even
talked about. Yeah. This is
the fantastic thing. So the
first thing I did when
I sat down with monad
is I looked at Keith's
a little three lines of
code, and I put them
into a file called food
dot MSH. And I tried
to run it. And by
the way, the, this Keith
Hill's blog page is filled
with code. It's not just
one point or two, a
three line code thing that
Scott is bringing here to
this guy is a, he
spends a lot of time
with monad it's obvious. Yeah.
I would like to find
out how he has a
job that lets him do
all this great stuff. Cause
he just has it. His
site, his site is basically
50 pages of sample code
with a sentence here and
there. It's really amazing what
he's doing. You get to
know this guy. So there's
a security model. When I
tried to run my own
first time MSH script, I
was told, well, you're not
allowed to run scripts. Monad
comes, locked down. So you
have to go into the
registry or do make some
settings from within Mona and
actually decide, what is your
execution policy? I set mine
to what's called remote signed,
basically saying that I can
only run remote files, files
that came down from the
internet if they have been
signed. So you can actually
digitally sign your scripts and
plug them into a MSH.
Okay. That kind of flexibility.
Doesn't it doesn't really exist
in the VB script world.
Yeah, exactly. And, and what's,
you know, you've always had
the question of whether I
should make a script or
whether I should make a,
you know, a console application.
So that's nothing new, but
I guess what is new
is that man, there's so
much, there's so much more
available now at the script
level with monad That's it.
If you think about what
you just said, you said,
do I make a script
that's kind of in your
left hand? Or do I
write a program in my
right hand? And there's really
no formalization. It's either
thingy or dot VBS thingy
and there's really no middle
place or you divide divided
up. So what would you
divide it up into? Well,
you'd make a console app
that does the real work.
And then you would call
that with a script, just
passing parameters in Exactly. And
you pass the parameters on
the command line via some
strings, right? So there's a
certain kind of MacGyver ESC
operation strategy between these scripts.
And these executable is you
kind of have this kind
of Rube Goldberg and thing.
You string together where this
guy writes to attempt file
and that guy opens the
file and the integration is
always strings. So extending monad
is there's actually four ways
instead of just the two
we've described in the old
and the old guard and
the old world where you
have scripts or you have
executable with monad, you can
make scripts. So you can
just make a text file
string together, a bunch of
commands allow execution of those
commands and then run it
that's number one. Number two
is a thing called the
commandlet CMD. Let's these are
tiny dotnet classes. So you
can write these in.net. You
could write in VB a
commandlet that says, I don't
know, add hyphen podcast. And
that would go up and
do whatever it needed to
do and update podcasts to
the, the car Franklin site,
right? So that's a command
tiny.net class that becomes a
command. Then you can have
a snap in a MSH
snap, and these are assemblies
containing a whole series of
commandlets and then you can
load them at startup time.
So you could have a
Carl Franklin podcast console where you
load up the, the command
console for what you do.
And you might have three,
four or five different command
consoles, one for this and
one for that. And then
the third one, which we
haven't talked about yet are
providers. And these are dotnet
classes that expose data as
almost as a drive. So
from the command line, you
know, you, you launch it
up and it looks just
like you're at a dos
prompt and you can type
DIR and you can type
CD and move around. But
I'm sitting at the command
line here and I can
see, see colon, whatnot. I'm
going to type CD H
K L M colon. So
now instead of C colon
backslash, my prompt says, HK,
LM, colon backslash, what do
you think? H KLM The
local machine key and the
registry I've just changed dirt
into the registry. Wow. And
I type DIR, and I'm
looking at hardware, software system,
CD software slash Microsoft slash
windows. Now I'm actually inside
the registry because what is
the command prompt? Right. It's
just a lie. It's just
as sure facia on top
of stuff. So these providers,
these MSH providers let you
change her into the file
system. Of course. So it
looks like dos, but also
into the registry, into the
environment. So I can actually
say C, D E N
V. Colon. And I can
look at my environment variables
and manipulate them. Huh? There
are, I think, eight different
providers that come with MSH,
but you can go and
get code for one that
is a visual source, safe
provider. It's a, it's very
much sample code. It's just
an example. It's not quite
ready yet. It's at a
shrink, stir.com/ . It's not
as complicated as you would
think. It's actually, it's pretty
scary because it looks like
it's got a lot of
pages, but a lot of
it is a comments. This
is a really interesting thing.
This is a provider again,
not updated for the newest
release, but you could type
CD VSS colon, and then
you'd be floating around inside
a visual source safe. Wow.
So think of the other
thing you might want to
CD into a outlook email
file, right? What are all
these different places you might
want to explore as data
in that familiar, hierarchical way
that the Dodge prompt gives
you? And then when you
write your scripts that act
on this data, they can
act on it using these
same commands that we're used
to using. And Scott, I
just want to remind the
listeners at this time that
a Hanselman it's would not
be possible without the generous
support from our sponsors. And
one of those sponsors is
automated QA, and they make
a product called TestComplete, which
is just a complete solution
for testing in.net. And it's
great stuff. We love it.
And that's why they're a
sponsor. And so if you
please do us a favor
and check out their site@automatedqa.com
and also let them know
that you heard about them
on Hansel minutes, that will
help believe it or not
keep this show on the
air. Hey, let's get back
to this object being the,
you know, the basic thing
that you pass around because,
you know, when you said
that and you said, this
is where the brain thing
happens, I think it's just
beginning to happen with me.
And so I want to
revisit it to make sure
that, that everybody understands this,
you know, you said is
that when you have scripts
and command line programs, console
applications, now the string is
sort of the defacto standard
piece of data that you
pass in and out, and
now you can use objects.
So you know, that it
just is mind blowing. It
really, it really is because
what you can do is
at any point in your
application where you have an
object, you can just drop
into a, you know, a
console App that you've written
with. Monad a script pass
that object in already completely
jelled without having to do
any serialization, blah, blah, blah.
And now your console app
in monad has access to
that object and it can
pass it to other things.
I mean, that's just, that's
just that's that is mind
blowing. Yeah, there are, there
are some certain  about
making your objects and assemblies
available, but all the different
objects, whether they be.net or
comm that you have available
in the system already can
be used. Like if you
look at shrink, stir.com/ ,
a guy says from the
command line in one line,
he says new object, new
hyphen object. And he says,
hyphen comms, he has to
let, let monad know that
he's going to be using
a calm object. She says,
new object, calm quote, shell
dot application. That's a calm
Prague ID. Then he says.windows
and pulls out the windows
collection of shell, that application,
and then hits enter and
gets a list of all
of the currently open internet
Explorer windows. Wow. Right? So
this is just an object
out there. That's always had
that information. You could do
this in visual studio. You
could do this in VB
script, but he's just being
able to access that information
in a very terse, but
very clear format within monad
in a single line. Then
here's the powerful part. Then
he says pipe and he
pipes it through select select
is another one of those
commands. It's just out there
floating around one of the
builtin commandlets and he says,
select new location, name, location,
Earl. So select doesn't know
anything about this comm object.
It just knows that data's
coming in kind of like
a, like a hash table
almost right. And it's going
to use basically reflection to
show just the location and
the location. And he did
this all in one line.
It's fantastic. Now, getting, getting
back to this office, you
brought up a fantastic point.
When I go out to
the command line in MSH
for the first time and
I type DIR, and I
see a directory, that's there
to make you feel comfortable.
DIR doesn't really exist. If
I type alias space DIR
and hit enter. I see
that DIR is a lie.
It's an alias. It really
is get child item, get
hyphen child items. So DIR
doesn't really do what I
thought it was. So if
DIR was a lie, what
else is a lie? Well,
see, CD, if I type
alias space CD changed her,
it's actually set hyphen location.
All the commands that we're
used to using in the
dos prompt are there, but
they're being exposed and redirected
to existing commandlets. So when
I'm typing, DIR, I'm really
saying get child item when
I type like type or,
or cat that you would
type in Unix to say
type this file to the
screen, that's actually calling the
commandlet called get. Now that
means that DIR just calls
get child items. So then
when you write a provider
like a visual short save
provider, or maybe I might
want to write a dos
blog provider where I could
CD into DAS blog files.
I don't know that it's
so overwhelming. How many things
you could do with this?
When I type DIR, I
know it's going to work
because my provider has implemented
the things that make, get
child item work correctly. Yeah.
So they've actually built that
facia on Titan of making
MSH look and act for
the most part when appropriate
like dos, like the windows
command line, just using aliases.
But you can use all
of these same things with
the power of like the
new object and the select
and whatnot. Wow. Yeah. It's,
it's pretty amazing stuff. I
am absolutely absolutely overwhelmed. So
you're, you're a SQL guy.
Let's, let's talk about how
you could use this to
administer other stuff. Okay. I
wouldn't say I'm a SQL
guy, but I use it
quite a lot. I'm no
Kim trip though. Well, since
you know, Kim trip that
makes you a very practical
guy, shrinks.com/d for w this
guy has a Dan Sullivan
up at plural. Pluralsight has
got a really great article
on how you can use
the existing SQL management objects
or the SMO. These are
objects that are available within
SQL server that are a
little smarter than the SQL
command exe, where he says,
like, say, you've got a
server called Carl. You could
say percent Karl equals new
object. And then you're going
to launch, you're going to
make new object and you're
gonna make one of these
SMO objects, these SQL management
objects. So now I've got
this variable called dollar sign.
Carl, that actually is for
the most part, your database,
it's really a reference to
the SMO object, but I
can start thinking about it
as dollar sign, Carlos Carlos
database. So then I can
say dollar sign, Carl dot
databases and get a list
of all the databases on
there. I can start managing
your databases from the command
line. Wow. Now all the
same security things. And I
need to know the password.
I mean, there's nothing about
monad, that's going to allow
you to share your knotty
things anymore than you already
could. Yeah. You know, that
thought did cross my mind
before when, you know, when
I was thinking about how
rich this is, that it
could be a potential security
hole. And I'm very glad
to hear that they've addressed
that. Yeah. Very, very much.
So now, you know, you
use query analyzer, right? Yeah.
So you go in, you
type in select star from
authors, you hit F five
and you get kind of
a, an interactive shell that
allows you to write sequel
and a little bit more
flexible way. Monad is not
very friendly for someone to
sit down and just start
writing. It's kind of like
code rush. It's unspeakably powerful.
But if you give up
before you make that, make
it over that hump. Yeah.
Then you're Not going to
get the full benefit, right.
Spend some time with it.
Exactly. Carl prosser@trickster.com slash
has created a thing called
the MSH analyzer. It is
a, he calls it a
0.0 0.1 release, but it
is still stunningly. Fantastic. It
is a, basically a like
query analyzer, but it's a
query analyzer for MSH shells
when he automatically populates a
property list to the same
kind of property toolbox that
you see in visual studio
with the actual objects that
get returned. Because one of
the things about monad is
when you say DIR, you
just see what comes out
on the screen. You don't
see what could have come
out because DIR get child
item returns objects. Right. But
what comes out on the
screen is what's the F
the default formatting. Yeah. There's
all sorts of stuff I
could've asked for. Do you
get like the two string,
basically? You're saying Exactly, you're
getting the equivalent of two
string. You're actually getting format
list, format, table, but there's
all that other stuff. But
the funny you find out
what else I can do.
Yeah. So Carl's got this
fantastic analyzer and it's actually
a showcase for hosting these
shells. So check this out
and it'll blow your mind.
If you want to build
an administrative console for your
application, you would build it
entirely with commandlets and MSH,
get it working from the
command line. And then when
you write your, your WinForms
application, because everyone would love
to have both a command
line and a WinForms application,
your wind farms application would
call the underlying stuff. So
monad becomes your data access
layer. It's your Dao. Hm.
For your admin. Wow. Wow.
This is why The exchange
team is writing all this
stuff entirely in MSH. The
next version of exchange apparently
is going to be hardcore
into, into Mona. I'm not
a Unix guy by any
stretch of the imagination, but
it appears to me that
this is a unique, see
kind of a tool. Don't
your thing. It's, it's unique.
See if one would say
that a command line is
unit C, but using one
of my favorite analogies, comparing
monad to like bash or
any of the Unix shells
is the difference between shooting
a bullet and throwing it.
Yeah. That's how much more
advanced and thoughtful this is
now to be clear monad
is standing on the shoulders
of giants, right? Yes it
is. And you couldn't have
had monad without deep historical
thought around. Well, what happened
in the past, Right? And
it's got done now, Flection
and calm. I mean, it
is, it is definitely putting
a layer of abstraction on
top of the entire OSPF.
Sure. Take a look@shrinks.com slash
Vivek Sharma his blog.
He is another moment monad
expert who has got a
really interesting article called it's
a one line world. And
he shows all the different
things you might want to
do in one line, showing
things, get hyphen mailbox from
a server and then move
mailbox. That kind of flexibility
that one would get when
they design their stuff from
the very start using something
like monad, it's really, really
fantastic stuff. Wow. Also check
out Jeffrey snobbery presentation on
a webcast it's shrinks.com/ .
There's a Wiki up@channelnineatshrinks.com slash
piles and piles of
sample scripts@trickster.com slash . And
just start, start thinking about
this because the power and
the flexibility of this is
much more than I could
ever talk about in a,
in a 20 minute podcast.
Scott. So Just the like
official central place for mode
information at Microsoft in your
eyes. There's the Microsoft tech
net scripting center at
dot com slash . And
this has got articles and
repositories and sample code and
interviews with Jeffrey Schneider, the architect
responsible for monad piles of
information up there. There's the
monad team's technology blog at
dot com slash D
for Y. This is their
kind of monad team blog.
They throw up thoughts, ideas,
you know, little tips and
facts, how to modify startup
items in the registry, how
to make snap ins you
know, all those different things
that one might want to.
Okay. So we got just
enough time for a few
more, a few more links.
If you got it. There's
a, there's a really interesting
example from a multicultural standpoint,
at shrinks.com/ . It shows
you how to make blocks
of reusable script that calls
other scripts. So you can
actually change scripts together where
you could pass in a
block of script to another
script. And wow, cool. Yeah,
you can do, you can
extend existing commands within monad
and add new properties. This
is a very Ruby S
kind of thing, shrinks.com/d for
Z as an interesting example,
where you can add new
properties via script to existing
objects. Wow. So for example,
if you wanted to add
a property to the system
dot diagnostics dot process, so
you could create a, a
XML file that says, I
want a new property called
help link on all of
my different objects. So then
I can call my help
link property on objects that
did not previously have this.
So I'm basically tacking on
new functionality to objects that
never expected it. The sample
up there@thinxtra.com slash  adds
an MSDN help link to
existing objects within, within monad.
I imagine that's going have
to be codex. Is security
aware? Oh yeah. There's all
sorts of different plugins and
ways to make this appropriately
secure, but that's way advanced
and beyond what we're doing
here. Yeah. Now the 3.1
version is out. It came
out at the end of
February. There is an older
article@arstechnicaatshrinks.com slash . That's a
guided tour of the command
shell. It's a guided tour
as of last October though,
but it is still conceptually
correct. And some pretty interesting
stuff and worth taking a
look at. Very cool. All
right. Well, go get monad
and play with it. That's
the call to action this
week? No question. Absolutely. All
right, Scott, we will see
you next week on Hansel
minutes. Thanks a lot. Bye
bye.